**SELECT** — decides the schema of the query result (relation/table) 
**FROM** — forms a big table by join/cross product all tables in this list, **as the data source.**
**WHERE** — **applies a condition to each tuple** of the data source table formed in the FROM clause, screens out the ones that return false.
**GROUP BY** — divides the remaining tuples into groups with common values 
* Groups rows that have the same values into summary rows, like "find the number of customers in each country".
* Often used with aggregate functions (`COUNT()`, `MAX()`, `MIN()`, `SUM()`, `AVG()`) to group the result-set by one or more columns.
**HAVING** — applies to each group formed by the GROUP BY clause, screens out the whole groups that return false 
* Was added to SQL because the `WHERE` keyword cannot be used with aggregate functions.
**ORDER BY** — sort the result table. It will only change the presentation of the result, but not the result itself. 

Sub queries, Set/Bag operators

```sql
insert into CSCIStudents(sno, fname, lname)
	(select sno, fname, lname
	from Students
	where sno in (select sno
				from records
				where cid = 'csci'
				and point >= 2));
```
## Universal Qualifications
**Query:** List the name of each employee who worked on EVERY project.

**Interpretation:** For each employee, if there doesn’t exist a project such that this employee didn’t work on it, then this employee’s name should be in the result.

Mathematically, universal quantification can be translated to existential quantification plus double (table level) negations:

(∀x, x is a project ⇒ emp y worked on x) ≡ (is equivalent to) (∄ x, x is a project and emp y NEVER worked on x)

Remember that, 
## Aggregation
**Aggregation/grouping:** Using 'group by' and 'having' together.
### Aggregation Functions
`min` - Gets the smallest number value of a column based on a condition.
`max` - Gets the largest number value of a column based on a condition.
`count` - Counts amount of rows in the table that satisfy a given condition (returns the amount as an integer).
`sum` - Adds up the number values of a column based on a condition.
`avg` - Averages the number values of a column based on a condition.

Can do math inside of these functions (multiplying columns), or use these functions for math in a query `select (max(col) - avg(col))`
```sql
select sno, count(cid) numCourses
from Students
	natural join Records
	natural join Points
where points >= 2
group by sno
having numCourses >= 3
order by numCourses desc sno;
-- we first get a big table, one for each student and each course
-- 'group by sno' groups all the courses each student is taking together
-- only display students that have 3 or more courses (we count cid amount in each group)
-- asc is default, but we want it descending, so have to use 'desc'
```
Grouping by multiple columns:
```sql
group by sno, fname, lname -- groups by all 3 columns, if any of the 3 columns is different, will make a different group
```

When there is no `group by` statement, each tuple is considered its own group.
