## Privileges
1. Privilege on what?
	- OS or Database
2. What privileges?
	- OS:
		- on files
		- rwx 
	- Database: 
		- on tables
		- select, insert, update, delete, etc.
	- usage: the right to use that element in one's own declarations
	- trigger: the right to define triggers on that relation
	- execute: the right to execute a piece of code
	- under: the right to create subtypes of a given type
3. Who gets privileges?
	- For both OS and Database: it depends
4. Who can grant privileges?
	- OS:
		- superuser/owner
	- Database: 
		- DBA/creators/owners/ user with **great privilege**
5. How to grant privileges?
## Granting Privileges
-	**SQL Grant statement** can let a user "copy" a privilege to another user
	- `grant privilege_list on <table_name> to <user_list> [with grant options];`
-	**Privilege list:** an option is ALL PRIVILEGES, that means **all the privileges** that the grantor may legally grant on the db element in question.
-	**DB element:** usually a relation (base table or view). If it is another kind of element, the name of the element is preceded by the type of that element. 
-	The special user `public` means all users. 
-	SQL Statement Example: `Grant select, update On HR.Employees To usera, userb With Grant Option; Grant delete On HR.Employees To userb;`
## Revoking Privileges
- A granted privilege can be **revoked** at any time. 

- **SQL Revoke statement:** `REVOKE ON FROM CASCADE|RESTRICT; REVOKE GRANT OPTION FOR ON FROM CASCADE|RESTRICT;` 
	- Example: `Revoke Grant Option For select On HR.Employees From usera Cascade;`
	- `Revoke update On HR.Employees From usera Restrict;`
	- In the second statement: The core privileges themselves remain, but the option to grant them to others is removed. 
- `cascade`: revoke any privileges that were granted only because of the revoked privileges. 
- `restrict`: if the privilege has passed on by the user, the revoke with RESTRICT option would fail. You'll be forced to use CASCADE option.
## Views
**Base table:** created by create table statement, physically exists, persistent, won't change because other relation's change 

**Virtual Views:** relations defined by a **query over other relations** 
- virtual views are not stored, but can be queried as if they existed. 

Views can also be **materialized:**

**Declaring a view:** `CREATE VIEW view_name (attribute list) AS (view-definition-SQL);`
- Ex: `Create View Dept_Budget (dname, totalSalary) AS (select dname, sum(salary) as totalSalary from Departments join Emps on did = workdept group by dname);`
**Querying a view:** the same as a base table. During the query processing time, the view would be replaced by its definition in order to execute the query. 
- `select dname from dept_budget where totalSalary > 100000;`
removing view: `DROP VIEW view_name;`
## Sequences
Syntax of creating a sequence: 
```sql
CREATE SEQUENCE <sequence_name>
Start With Increment By 
Order | NoOrder 
Cycle | NoCycle 
Maxvalue | NoMaxvalue
Minvalue | NoMinvalue; 

-- Example: 
Create Sequence AutoProject
No Start With 1000 
Increment by 1 
Order 
NoCycle 
No Maxvalue 
MinValue 1000; 

Create Sequence Confirmation
No Start With 1000 
Increment by 4 
NoOrder 
Cycle 
Maxvalue 9999 
MinValue 10000;
```
## Triggers
An example of trigger: 
CREATE OR REPLACE TRIGGER "projectNumber" 
	before insert on Projects 
		for each row 
			when (NEW.projectNo is null) 
		begin 
			select AutoProjectNo.nextval into :NEW.projectNo from dual;
		end; 
		/
		
Firing Point: Before/After 
Options: insert/delete/update on <table_name> •

For each Row or For each statement
- when (bool condition) 
- Begin body End; 
- body can include multiple sql statements