## Goals
Two goals: 
1. **Atomicity**: allow transactions to be either committed (with a guarantee that the effects are permanent) or aborted (with a guarantee that the effects disappear) 
2. **Durability**: allow the database to be recovered to a consistent state in case of some kind of failure  
- **input** a schedule of operations produced by scheduler (including commit and abort requests) 
- **output**: a schedule of reads, writes and forced writes

## Failures
- System failure
	- database server halted abruptly 
	- processing of transaction(s) halted abruptly 
	- connections to clients broken 
	- contents of memory buffers lost, however, database files are not damaged.
- Media failure
	- one or more database files become damaged or inaccessible 
	- a media failure may cause a system failure, or possibly an orderly system system shutdown. 
	- Solution: **Duplication**! (by archiving (backup) or redundant (maybe distributed) copies)

## Atomicity and Durability
Overall, a failure can not cause a transaction to be partially executed. 

After a failure occurs, active transactions should be aborted automatically

Committed transactions should be durable, i.e., changes they made to the database should not be lost as a result of the failure.
# Solutions
## Unrealistically simple ways
**Keep all changes in memory and write them all back to disk when a transaction commits.**
- guaranteed atomicity 
Problems: 
- too many consecutive writes when a transaction commits, what if system failure happened in the middle of those writes? 
- what if we run out of memory buffers? 
**Keep no changes in memory and write each change to disk right away.**
- guaranteed durability 
Problems: 
- very poor response time 
- what if the transaction aborts (we now have written dirty data)?
- what if the system crashed in the middle of executing a transaction?
## Log based approaches
A **log** is a **read/append only** data structure (file). 
- When transactions are running, log records are appended to the log. 
- Log records contain several types of information: 
	- **UNDO information:** old values of objects that have been modified by a transaction. 
	- **REDO information:** new values of objects that have been modified by a transaction. 
	- **BEGIN/COMMIT/ABORT/END:** records are recorded whenever a transaction begins, commits, aborts, or ends.

Log writing syntax: `LOG [Ti, x, old_x, new_x]`
### Write-Ahead Logging (WAL)
**WAL protocol** makes sure that the log is consistent with the main database.
- Log updates are written to the disk before database updates.

WAL protocol requires: 
- **UNDO rule:** a log record for an update is written to disk before the corresponding data page is written to disk. 
- **REDO rule:** all log records for a transaction are written to disk before the transaction is considered to be committed. 

**UNDO guarantees Atomicity** -
**REDO guarantees Durability** -
#### WAL Example
**Read(Ti, x);** 
- read value v of x (if x is not in cache, load it in) and return it to the upper manager 
**Write(Ti, x);** 
- add Ti to the set of active transactions 
- read the old value v of x (load x to cache if it is not in) 
- LOG \[Ti, x, v, v’] • write v’ to x (x is still in the cache) and then ACK write 
**Commit(Ti);** 
- LOG \[Ti, commit] 
- flush all log records and then Acknowledge commit 
- LOG \[Ti, end] 
**Abort(Ti);** 
- scan LOG backwards for data items updated by Ti, restore the old value of x (only restores in cache) 
- LOG \[Ti, abort] 
- Acknowledge abort 
- LOG \[Ti, end]
# Recovery Algorithm - ARIES
**ARIES (Algorithms for Recovery and Isolation Exploiting Semantics)** Algorithm Assumptions:
- WAL used 
- cascadeless schedules
- only **single copy** of any data item in the **cache** 
When system **accidentally crashes** and we **need to restart** the system: 
- Let R = emptySet 
- scan LOG to find all active and committed transactions 
- scan LOG backwards for records \[Ti, x, v, v’] and for each such record such that x not in R: 
	- read x; 
		- if Ti was **committed** then write v’ into x and put x to R; 
		- if Ti was **active** then write v into x; 
- when done, write, abort, and end records for all active transactions 
- restart completed 
Restart operation is **idempotent** (if system crashes during restart, we don’t mind)
## Checkpoints
Logs can grow very big over time — place a **checkpoint** to mark a new start 

A simple checkpoint algorithm:
1. prevent new transactions from starting, wait for active ones to finish 
2. copy modified memory blocks to database files 
3. append a checkpoint record to the log 
4. allow new transactions to begin