## What is data?
* Data is known facts/statistics that have implicit meaning.
* Data is collected for reference or analysis.
* Data is different from information (interpreted data is information and has explicit meaning). 
* Data can be viewed as a true proposition (a proposition is a sentence that could be true or false). 
	* For example: “Oracle developed DBMS Oracle” is a true proposition, while “Oracle developed DBMS SQL Server” is a false proposition.
* A database is really a collection of true propositions (facts).

**Closed-world assumption:**
* If it's in database, true
* If it's not in database, false
## What is a data model?
* A **data model** is an abstract model that organizes elements of data and standardizes how they relate to one another and to the properties of real-world. 
* For instance, a data model may specify that the data element representing a car be composed of a number of other elements which, in turn, represent the color and size of the car and define its owner.
* Data models generally consist of three parts:
	* Structure of the data or mathematical representation of the data
		* What do you use to represent the data?
		* E.g. Files in a file system data model
	* Operations on the data
		* E.g. Append and truncate operations in the file system data model
	* Constraints on the data
		* E.g. Maximum size constraints in the file system data model.
* **A database system implements a data model.**
### Algebra data model example
**Structure:** We can restrict possible numbers to positive integers
**Operations:** add, subtract, multiply, divide
**Constraints:** Subtraction and division would have constraints
* Subtraction - first number must be greater than second
* Division - has to have positive integer result
# Relational data models
* A single way to represent data: as a two-dimensional table called a relation.
**Structure:** Relations/tables (arrays of structs/records/rows)
**Operations:** Projection, selection, join, etc., or any operations from "relational algebra".
* Projection is a vertical cut on the table (only focus on select attributes)
	* unary operator (input one relation, output one relation)
	* operates on one operand
* Selection is a horizontal cut on the table (only focus on select tuples)
	* also a unary operator (operates on one operand)
* Join joins rows from multiple tables based on a related column between them
	* binary operator (operates on two operands to produce a new result)
**Constraints:** Primary key and foreign key constraints, etc.

**Advantages of relational data model:**
* Simple and solid conceptual model (just rows and columns).
* Logical view and physical implementation strictly separated.
* Powerful, bag-oriented, and declarative query languages (SQL).
* Clean transaction processing.
**Disadvantages of relational data model:**
* TOO simple sometimes
* Not flexible with fixed schema
## Other Data Models
Other data models for DBMS in the past: 
* Network model (outdated)
* Hierarchy model (outdated)
* OO-Relational data model 
	* Allows richer data model for complex data and relationships, instead of just relational rows and columns.
* Semi-structured data model
	* Key-value structure integrates schema with data.
	* Extremely flexible
	* Used in most NoSQL database systems
* Knowledge-base (logic-based deductive systems)
	* Used in AI fields
* Multi-database systems
	* Useful in the integration of multiple heterogeneous (different) legacy database systems.
* Data warehousing
	* Useful in integrating data from different sources.
	* Widely used in data mining.
* The web
## DBMS requirements
1. Provide data definition facilities
	* Provide a data definition language (DDL)
	* Provide a user accessible catalog (data dictionary)
2. Provide methods for storing, retrieving, and updating data (data manipulation language - DML)
3. Support multiple views (DDL)
4. Be able to specify integrity constraints (data control language - DCL)
5. Provide security control over the data (DCL)
6. Internal processes:
	* Provide concurrency control mechanism (lock or timestamp based).
	* Support logical transactions (ACID).
	* Protect data during system crashes (recovery).
	* Provide other maintenance utilities.
## Definitions
**relations/tables** - a collection (unordered) of tuples/records/rows
**tuple/record/row** is a collection of attributes
each column is called an **attribute/field**
**schema** - gives you a hint about information/meaning of data in the table
* metadata describing the data
#### Technologies used in DBMS
* programming languages 
* software engineering 
* compilation/optimization 
* operating systems 
* concurrent programming 
* data structure and algorithms 
* distributed systems 
* AI (Information retrieval) 
* statistical techniques 
#### Who works with DBMS?
* Database system developers 
* Database administrators (DBA) 
	* Manages conceptual schema 
	* Assists with application view integration 
	* Monitors overall performance of DBMS 
	* Defines internal schema 
	* Loads and reformats database 
	* Responsible for security and reliability 
* Database application developers 
	* Programmer: implements applications to access the database 
	* Analyst: develops application specifications 
* End users 
	* Naïve user: access database through applications 
	* Sophisticated users: access database directly using ad-hoc DML queries