Two sets of languages:
Commands - different on each language/system, sets up environment
Structured Query Language (SQL) - anything to do with tables and data
## SQL
**SQL has 3 sub-components:**
DDL - Data Definition Language
* Kind of like variable declarations in programming languages
DML - Data Manipulation Language
* Includes updating content of tables, and querying the data.
* Viewing data is also manipulation
DCL - Data Control Language
* Enforce security
SQL is a case insensitive language, except in literal strings (denoted by single quotation marks).
* Some database systems can overwrite this exception.
* No such thing as a 'single character' data type in SQL (like char in C).
# Data Types
* Integers
	* Integer(n)
* Floating-point Numbers
	* Float(p)
	* **Number(precision, scale)** - for Oracle
		* Number(5, -10) - 10 total digits before decimal, 5 significant digits, the other 5 digits are 0s
		* Precision range: 1 - 38
		* Scale range: -84 to 127
* String
	* **char(n)** - allocates exactly n bytes for that string
		* If string is not length n, pads whitespace until it is n bytes long (could be before or after depending on application).
	* **varchar(n)** - allocates up to n bytes for that string (can be less).
* Date/Time
	* Date 
		* has time zone info
		* accurate to the nearest second
	* Timestamp
		* accurate to fractions of seconds
* Unstructured Large Objects (up to 4GB)
	* blob(size)
		* Binary large object
	* clob(size)
		* Character large object
## Constraints
**Default Values**
* `default` 
* Used to set a default value for a column, will be added to all new records if no other value is specified.
**Not Null**
* `not null`
* Enforces a column to not accept null values, the column must always contain a value.
**Primary Key**
* `primary key`
* Uniquely identifies each record in a table.
* Primary keys can't contain null values, and must be unique.
* A table can only have one primary key (can be single or multiple columns).
**Unique**
* `unique`
* Ensures that all values in a column are different.
* Not a primary key, and you can have multiple unique constraints per table.
**Foreign Key**
* `foriegn key`
* Used to prevent actions that would destroy links between tables.
* A column in one table that refers to the primary key of another table.
* The table with foreign key is called the **child table**, and the table with the primary key is called the **parent table**.
**General Check Constraints**
* `check`
* Used to limit the value range in a column.
* Can define it on a specific column.
* Can define it on a table 
	- Can limit the values on certain columns based on values in other columns.
### Ways to add constraints
On a single attribute: 
* not null 
* primary key 
* references table_name - - foreign key 
* check (age>0 AND age<120) 
* check (gender in (’F’, ’M’)) 
On a tuple/row as a whole:
* check (gender = ’F’ OR name not like ’Ms.%’) 
* Primary key (col_1, col_2) 
* Foreign key (col_1, col_2) references table_name 
Name constraints:
* Constraint constraintName Constraint_specification

Creating a table:
```sql
Create table <table_name>(
	<column_name> <data_type>,
	<column_name> <data_type>,
	<constraint_specifications>
);
```

```sql
create table Students(
	snum char(9) primary key,
	name varchar(80),
	email varchar(100),
	dob date,
	SIN char(9) unique
);

create table Courses(
	cid char(4) default 'csci',
	cnum char(3) check cnum IN ('101', '102', '103'),
	title varchar(30),
	credits number(1, 0) check credits >= 0,
	primary key(cid, cnum)
);

create table Sections(
	cid char(4),
	cnum char(3),
	secnum char(6),
	primary key(cid, cnum, secnum),
	foreign key(cid, cnum) references Courses(cid, cnum)
);

create table Registration(
	snum char(9) references Students.
	
);
```
## Modifying Schema
* **Drop table** statement to delete a table (and all its data).
	* `drop table <table_name>`
* **Alter table** statement used to add, delete, or modify columns in an existing table.
	* `alter table <table_name>`
	* Can also be used to add and drop various constraints on an existing table.
```sql
alter table <table_name>
	add <constraint_name> <constraint_description>; 

alter table <table_name>  
	drop <constraint_name>; 
```

Altering a table:
```sql
alter table Courses
modify credits Number(2, 0);

alter table Courses
drop credits;

alter table courses
add credits Numner(2, 0);
```

Want to make as little changes as possible to the schema. Changing schema will affect existing data.
## Modifying Database Content
Inserting one tuple:
```sql
insert into <table_name> [(column1, column2, ... )] 
values (expression1, expression2, ... ); 
```
Inserting multiple tuples:
```sql
insert into <table_name> [(column1, column2, ... )] 
select expression1, expression2, ... 
from <source_table_name> 
[where <conditions>]; 
```
Delete:
```sql
delete from <table_name> 
[where <conditions>];
```
Update:
```sql
update <table_name>
set column = <new_value> 
[where <conditions>]; 
```
#### Some Oracle Functions
**To_date()** - converts a string to a date data type.
`to_date(string_date_value, pattern_string)`
`to_date('Jan 12, 10', 'Mon dd, yyyy`) -> Order and pattern must match between strings.
[Learn more here](https://www.techonthenet.com/oracle/functions/to_date.php)

**To_char()** - Converts a number or date to a string data type.
`to_char(date_value, display_pattern_string)`
`to_char(DOB, 'dd-mon-yyyy, Day hh:mi')`
[Learn more here](https://www.techonthenet.com/oracle/functions/to_char.php)