# Datalog
**Datalog** (tuple/domain calculus) is a logical query language (“database logic”). 
* Datalog queries consist of if-then rules. 
* Each of these rules expresses the idea that from certain combination of tuples in certain relations, we may infer that some other tuple must be in some other relation, or in the answer to a query. 
* Datalog is a declarative language. (SQL is also declarative, while Relational Algebra is functional.)
	* Declarative language is a language that specify what a program **should** do, rather than **how to** do it.

## Atoms
An **atom** is a Boolean function. There are two types of atoms in Datalog:
* Predicate (relational): a predicate followed by its arguments
	* Each predicate takes a fixed number of arguments
	* Predicate atom **tests the membership**
		* Lend(PA, PB, 1000) 
		* ==> Is it true that elements PA, PB, and 1000 form a tuple that is in the set Lend? 
		* ==> Is it true that person PA lend person PB $1000?
	* Predicates are database relations
* Arithmetic: comparison between two arithmetic expressions
## Rules and Queries
A Datalog rule consists of:
* A relational atom called the head (LHS)
	* Variables in the head are universally quantifiable
* The symbol ::=, read as 'if'
* A body consisting of one or more atoms, called subgoals (RHS).
	* Subgoals may be either relational or arithmetic.
	* Subgoals are connected by AND, OR, and NOT.
	* Variables in the body are existentially quantifiable

A Datalog **query** is a collection of **one or more rules**
Datalog is relationally complete.
### Extensional vs Intentional
Predicate (Relational) atom can be either extensional or intentional. 
* **Extensional** predicates: whose relations are stored in a database (they already exist).
* **Intentional** predicates: whose relations are computed by applying one or more Datalog rules (they exist because somebody’s intent). 

	* Predicate
		* Students(x, fname, lname, y, z) part
	* Arithmetic
		* x >= '2000-01-01' part
```
Result(variable list) ::= Body(variables)

Result(fname, lname) ::= Students(x, fname, lname, y, z)
-- For all values fname and lname, if there exists values x, y, z - produces a tuple in Students of form (x, fname, lname, y, z).

Result(fname, lname) ::= Students(_, fname, lname, _, _)
-- If we don't care about x, y, and z values, _ acts as a placeholder value.
-- We don't care what _ is, but we need to put it if there's a column there.


Result(fname, lname) ::= Students(x, fname, lname, y, z) and x >= '2000-01-01'
-- No exact syntax, so make sure your Boolean expression makes sense.

Result(cid, cno, term, grade, point*cred) ::= Records('1234', cid, cno, term, grade)
	and Points(grade, point)
	and Courses(cid, cno, _, cred)
```

Though relational algebra and Datalog are two different languages, their semantic meanings are the same.
### Unsafe Queries
Two potential unsafe factors: 
* Top Negation 
	* Result(dn) ::= NOT Departments(\_, dn, \_) 
* Infinite domain involving arithmetic operations
	* Result(x) ::= Emps(\_, \_, \_, salary, \_, \_) AND x > salary 
Safety condition:
* Every variable that appears anywhere in the rule must appear in some **non-negated, relational subgoal of the body.**
## Operations
### Set Operations
**Union:** use multiple rules with the same head 
* Result(a, b) ::= rule1 Result(a, b) ::= rule2 
**Intersection:** Two subgoals connected with AND 
* Result(a, b) ::= T1(a, b) AND T2(a, b) 
**Difference:** R AND NOT S 
* Result(a, b) ::= T1(a, b) AND NOT T2(a, b)
### Database Operations
**Projection:**
* Result(fn, ln) ::= Emps(\_, fn, ln, \_, \_, \_ )
**Selection:**
* Result(fn, ln) ::= Emps(\_, fn, ln, salary, \_, \_ ) AND salary > 50000 
**Join:** using same variables in multiple relational subgoals 
* Result(fn, ln, dn) ::= Emps(\_, fn, ln, \_, did, \_ ) AND Departments(did, dn, \_ ) 

## Example
For each employee who works in a department managed by Mary Smith, list his/her first and last name and the department’s name.
```
Result(fn, ln, dn) ::= Emps(eid, x, y, _, _, _)  
					And Departments(did, dn, eid) 
					And Emps(_, fn, ln, _, did, _)
					And x = ‘Mary’ And y = ‘Smith’
```
Equivalent example:
```
Result(fn, ln, dn) ::= Emps(eid, ‘Mary’, ‘Smith’, _, _, _)
					And Departments(did, dn, eid)
					And Emps(_, fn, ln, _, did, _)
```